Docs overview cleanup (#58)
neondatabase/website: content/docs/cloud/concepts.md

---
title: Concepts
enableTableOfContents: true

---

## Neon User

A Neon user is identified by their email address.

> A user registers and authenticates in Neon Web UI with their GitHub account. More authentication methods are coming soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user registers and authenticates in Neon Web UI with their GitHub or Google account. More authentication methods are coming soon.
```

## Using API keys

API keys allow users to access Neon application programming interface.

An API key provides access to any action available to the user. Currently, API keys cannot be scoped to the specific Projects. Neon users can provision multiple API keys. An API key that is no longer needed can be revoked; this action cannot be reverted. Any issued API key is valid forever until it is revoked.

Check out the [API Reference](https://console.neon.tech/api-docs) for more information about using the API keys and available API methods.

## Project

A Project is a collection of Postgres databases, Postgres users and other settings on Neon cloud service.

A Project contains a virtual instance with a Postgres server, also called Compute, as well as the storage used to store the Project data. The amount of virtual resources available for the Project is subject to limits defined by the [Free Tier](#free-tier).

Compute is stateless and can be automatically activated and suspended due to user activity.

## Compute Lifecycle

A Compute node in Neon is a stateless Postgres process due to the separation of storage and compute. It has two main states: Active and Idle.

> Active means that Postgres is running currently. If there are no active queries for 5 minutes, the activity monitor will gracefully put the corresponding compute node into the Idle state to save energy and resources. The activity monitor is conservative, and it treats 'idle in transaction' connections as some activities do not break an application logic that relies on long-lasting transactions. Yet, it closes all 'idle' connections after 5 minutes of complete inactivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Active means that Postgres is running currently. If there are no active queries for 5 minutes, the activity monitor will gracefully put the corresponding compute node into the Idle state to save energy and resources. The activity monitor is conservative, and it treats 'idle in transaction' connections as some activities to avoid breaking an application logic that relies on long-lasting transactions. Yet, it closes all 'idle' connections after 5 minutes of complete inactivity.
```

> In the Idle state, you can still connect to your compute at any time. Neon will automatically activate it. Activation usually happens within a few seconds, so the first connection in the Idle state will have higher latency. Also, the Postgres page cache (shared buffers) will be cold after waking up from Idle state, and your usual queries may take longer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can connect to your compute at any time, if it's Idle Neon will automatically activate it. Activation usually happens within a few seconds, so the first connection in the Idle state will have higher latency. Also, the Postgres page cache (shared buffers) will be cold after waking up from Idle state, and your usual queries may take longer.
```

After some period in the Idle state, Neon will start occasionally activating your Compute to check data availability. The checks period will gradually increase up to several days if the Compute does not receive any client connections.

> You can check all Compute state transitions in the Operations List tab on the dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check all Compute state transitions via the Operations widget on the Project Dashboard.
```

## Postgres Users

> Postgres users are created as a part of your Neon Project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Postgres users are created as a part of your Neon Project and can be managed via the Neon web UI.
A system user `web-access` is used for the SQL Editor in Neon UI and for the link authentication for psql. This user cannot be removed or used for authenticating in other scenarios.
The second user is created for client access. The credentials for that user can be managed, this user's credentials can be used for a password based psql authentication too.
More Postgres users can be created in Neon UI. 
```

## Postgres Databases

> When a Project is created, a default database for storing data is created along with it, the name of the database is "Main". Neon users cannot manipulate the system's databases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a Project is created, a default database for storing data is created along with it, the name of the database is "main". Neon user can create more databases inside a Project in Neon UI. Neon users cannot manipulate system databases, such as `postgres`, `template0`, or `template1`.
```

enableTableOfContents: true
---

## Neon User

A Neon user is identified by their email address.

A user registers and authenticates in Neon Web UI with their GitHub or Google account. More authentication methods are coming soon.

Once authenticated, a user can create and access [Projects](#project) and [query Project data](../tutorials#query-via-ui). You can also manage [Postgres Users](#postgres-users) and [Databases](#postgres-databases) in each Project.

### Using API keys

API keys allow users to access Neon application programming interface.

An API key provides access to any action available to the user. Currently, API keys cannot be scoped to the specific Projects. Neon users can provision multiple API keys. An API key that is no longer needed can be revoked; this action cannot be reverted. Any issued API key is valid forever until it is revoked.

Check out the [API Reference](https://console.neon.tech/api-docs) for more information about using the API keys and available API methods.

## Project

A Project is a collection of Postgres databases, Postgres users and other settings on Neon cloud service.

> A Project contains a virtual instance with a Postgres server, also called Compute, as well as the storage used to store the Project data. The amount of virtual resources available for the Project is subject to limits defined by the [Free Tier](#free-tier).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Project contains a virtual instance with a Postgres server, also called Compute, as well as the storage used to store the Project data. The amount of virtual resources available for the Project is subject to limits defined by the [Technical Preview Free Tier](#free-tier).
```

After some period in the Idle state, Neon will start occasionally activating your Compute to check data availability. The checks period will gradually increase up to several days if the Compute does not receive any client connections.

You can check all Compute state transitions in the Operations List widget on the Project dashboard.

## Postgres Users

Postgres users are created as a part of your Neon Project and can be managed via the Neon web UI. A system user `web-access` is used for the SQL Editor in Neon UI and for link authentication for psql. This user cannot be removed or used for authenticating in other scenarios.

The second user is created for client access. The credentials for that user can be managed, this user's credentials can be used for password-based psql authentication too.

More Postgres users can be created in Neon UI.

## Postgres Databases

When a Project is created, a default database for storing data is created along with it, the name of the database is "main". A Neon user can create more databases inside a Project in the Neon UI. Neon users cannot manipulate system databases, such as `postgres`, `template0`, or `template1`.

## Limits

> Neon gives you no cost access to the PostgreSQL databases within the Free Tier limits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neon gives you no cost access to the PostgreSQL databases within the Technical Preview Free Tier limits.
```

When the limit is reached, you will see the PostgreSQL error message:

```text
could not extend file because cluster size limit (10240 MB)
has been exceeded
```

## Point in Time Reset

Neon storage consumes extra space in order to support Point in Time Reset (PITR) and the ability to reset a branch to a historical state. The historical data is stored in log based format.

> Neon has limits on the modification history for [Free Tier](#free-tier) customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neon has limits on the amount of modification history stored for the [Technical Preview Free Tier](#free-tier) customers.
```

When the limit is reached, you will see the PostgreSQL error message:

```text
could not extend file because cluster size limit (10240 MB)
has been exceeded
```

## Point in Time Reset

Neon storage consumes extra space in order to support Point in Time Reset (PITR) and the ability to reset a branch to a historical state. The historical data is stored in log based format.

Neon has limits on the amount of modification history stored for the [Technical Preview Free Tier](#free-tier) customers.

## Compute Config

During the Technical Preview, Neon only supports modification to session level configuration parameters. Parameters are reset when the session is terminated (e.g. when compute is suspended).

See [Default Parameters](../compatibiilty#default-parameters).

See [https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/runtime-config.html](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/14/runtime-config.html) for details.

> ## Free Tier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Technical Preview Free Tier
```
